28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 
적절한 것은? [3점]
When two monkeys are trapped together in a small cage, 
they try everything they can to (A) prevent / start  a fight. 
Moving with caution and suppressing any behaviors that could 
trigger aggression are good short­term solutions to the 
problem. The monkeys sit in a corner and avoid any random 
movements; even a brief touch could be interpreted as the 
beginning of (B) generous / hostile  action. Mutual eye contact 
is also dangerous because, in monkey language, staring is a 
threat. The monkeys look up in the air or at the ground, or 
stare at some imaginary point outside the cage. But as time 
passes, sitting still and pretending (C) authority / indifference  
are no longer sufficient strategies to keep the situation under 
control. To avoid aggression and to reduce stress, an act of 
communication is needed to make it clear to the other 
monkey that no harm is intended.
(A) (B) (C)
① prevent generous authority
② prevent hostile authority
③ prevent hostile indifference
④ start hostile indifference
FUTURE DRIVE MOTOR SHOW 2013
Future Drive Motor Show is one of the most popular 
motor shows in the world that has been held annually 
since 2001.
• Dates: November 9 through November 18
• Hours
- November 9 - 17: 10 a.m. to 10 p.m.
- November 18: 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
(Box office closes one hour prior to the end of 
the show each day.)
• Admission
- $12 for adults
- $6 for seniors aged 62 and older
- $6 for children aged 7 - 12
- Free admission for children aged 6 and younger 
when they are accompanied by a paying parent
• Special Days
- November 12: Women’s Day. Women are admitted 
for $6.
- November 13 through November 15: Anyone who 
brings three cans of food will receive a coupon 
for $6 admission. All food will be donated to the 
local food bank.
30. Winter Theater Camp에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 
않는 것은?
WINTER THEATER CAMP
December 9 - 20, 2013
Learn from outstanding performing and directing 
professionals in Dramatic Arts, Music, and Technical 
Support.
- Acting Concepts
- Vocal / Physical Expression
- Audition Skills
Class One (Ages 8 - 12): Monday - Friday Mornings,
9 a.m. - Noon
Class Two (Ages 13 - 18): Monday - Friday Afternoons,
1 p.m. - 4 p.m.
Registration Period: October 15 - November 15
Cost: $450 per person
- Early Bird Special Price: $425
(Register by October 31.)
Parents and friends will be invited to the special show 
performed by the campers on the last day of the camp.
Class Size Is Limited!
Call (540) 370-4300 for Information or Registration.
① 캠프 참가자는 전문가의 지도를 받는다.
② 연령에 따라 두 반으로 나뉜다.
③ 등록 기간은 10월 말까지이다.
④ 캠프 마지막 날에 캠프 참가자들이 공연을 한다.
⑤ 반의 인원수는 한정되어 있다.
31. Denali’s Flightseeing에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 
않는 것은?
DENALI’S FLIGHTSEEING
Enjoy the view of Alaska’s scenic highlights on a 
flightseeing tour with Denali’s Flying Service. Fly 
among the peaks of the Alaska Range with fantastic 
views and soar over the glaciers.
- Your tour begins at Anchorage’s Lake Hood.
- Every passenger gets a window seat.
- Available to all ages
What to Bring
- Please bring sunglasses, as well as comfortable 
shoes or hiking boots for glacier landings.
- Due to unpredictable Alaskan weather, Denali’s 
advises dressing in a light waterproof jacket, 
which will allow you to stay warm and dry during 
landings.
Price and Duration
- $385 per person
- 3 hours
* Notes
- Special rates for kids aged 12 and under
- No set departure times ― all tours are by request
① 알래스카 산맥 지역을 비행한다.
② 모든 승객은 창가 쪽 좌석에 앉게 된다.
③ 탑승 가능 연령에 제한이 있다.
④ 방수 재킷을 입는 것이 권장된다.
⑤ 미리 정해진 출발 시간은 없다.
32. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The graph above shows the percentage of people holding a 
driving license within age groups by gender in Scotland in 
2011. ① In total, a higher proportion of males (76%) held a 
license compared to females (60%), and in each age group the 
percentage of males was higher than that of females. ② The 
percentage of license holders for males in the 35 to 44 age 
group was exactly the same as that for males in the 45 to 59 
age group. ③ The percentage of females holding a license 
peaked in the 35 to 44 age group. ④ The percentage gap 
between male and female license holders was the biggest in 
those aged 75 and over. ⑤ On the other hand, the percentage 
gap between male and female license holders was the smallest 
in the 25 to 34 age group.
33. 다음 글에 드러난 필자의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
My hands were wet with sweat and I was shaking. Part of 
my mind was screaming out to me to turn back. I was 
standing on the bridge, preparing myself to jump off. There 
was an instructor on either side of my arms to keep me 
from falling off. The two men screamed, “FIVE, FOUR, 
THREE, TWO, ONE, GO!” Finally I jumped as far out as I 
could. My eyes closed and all I could hear was the wind 
flying past me. Then I felt the rope catch my ankles. My 
body jerked. Hanging upside down, I opened my eyes to see 
two hills reflected on the ocean. “I made it!” I thought to 
myself. I let out a satisfied laugh.
① nervous → proud
② bored → curious
③ hopeful → depressed
④ relaxed → horrified
⑤ pleased → disappointed
34. The most persuasive speakers, marketers, and leaders 
always frame their messages first in                    to 
get the “buy in” of the unconscious mind. Only after the 
immediate concerns of the unconscious have been satisfied 
can the conscious mind begin to be convinced of, or 
interested in, anything. Most politicians say, “I will do 
such­and­such if elected.” But we can’t think about that type 
of an uncertain future; we can only process the “now.” 
Similarly, marketers have found some phrases such as “get 
started today” and “immediate delivery” to be very powerful. 
Telling someone “It’ll be ready in a month,” or “It usually 
takes eight weeks for delivery,” will make the sale much 
more difficult. [3점]
① a musical tone
② the present tense
③ the long­term perspective
④ a few indirect words
⑤ a local language
35. Some media sociologists claim that it is a mistake to 
assume that television has destroyed family conversation: 
not only can documentaries, soap operas and other programs 
spark lively discussion among family members, but watching 
TV together is an important ritual that brings families into 
the same domestic space. Such arguments miss the point 
about                   . Can you really have a proper 
discussion with your spouse about whether she should leave 
her job if you are both half­watching TV? While television 
has potential to stimulate the mind and emotions, it is 
essentially a passive medium which draws us away from 
human interaction, whereas conversation is in essence an 
active form of engagement with others. [3점]
① what the ideal family size is
② different gender roles in the family
③ how parents’ attitude affects children
④ what a quality family conversation looks like
⑤ the generation gap between parents and children
36. The person who relates to certain individuals as family 
members or friends to the exclusion of others does not affirm 
that those to whom he relates are better persons. He affirms 
only that they are his relatives or friends. When a new father 
tells his two­week­old daughter that she is the “cutest little 
girl in town,” he is not informing the infant that she would 
win a beauty contest of girls of her age before a fair panel of 
judges. He is, more than anything else, telling her that she is 
his little girl. The same is true in general when people assert 
that their spouses, their parents, and their sons and daughters 
are “the best.” The highest praises are used to indicate that 
certain persons                                      . [3점]
① will have to be independent early
② are to be under extreme pressure
③ are the target of others’ criticism
④ are the specific objects of affection
⑤ have a network of many influential people
37. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
As you know, email is a popular, easy way to stay in 
contact with friends and family. The emails you send to your 
friends are most likely informal. (A) , an email about 
dinner plans might be only a few lines long and use the 
same language you would use if you were talking in person. 
When you are communicating with someone professionally, 
however, email is more important. In fact, email is often the 
main mode of communication for scientists ― so how you 
write an email can shape what other scientists think of your 
character. A well­written email can impress the reader and 
show that you are thoughtful and responsible, whereas a 
poorly written email can damage productive relationships or 
keep you from forming new ones. (B) , before sending 
an email, you must carefully consider your audience and the 
tone you will use.
(A) (B)
① In contrast Moreover 
② For example Therefore
③ In contrast On the contrary
④ For example On the contrary
38. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Colored flags are used to give important signals to drivers 
during auto races. ① The green flag means “start” or 
“continue,” and the yellow flag tells drivers to slow down and 
hold position. ② The red flag is a signal to stop, and when 
drivers see the black flag, they know they must pull into the 
pit area immediately. ③ A blue flag with yellow stripes is 
used to tell slower drivers to pull over and allow the leaders 
to pass. ④ Flags are used to represent organizations and 
groups of people such as the Olympic flag and the flag of 
the United Nations. ⑤ The two favorite flags of most drivers 
are: the white flag, which means “one lap to go,” and the 
checkered flag, which means “you have reached the finish.”
39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 
곳은? [3점]
Instead, look for watermelons that are symmetrical, are 
heavy for their size, and have a creamy yellow spot on 
the bottom.
When faced with a bunch of watermelons, all promising 
delicious juiciness inside, how do you know which one to 
pick? ( ① ) It is suggested that you skip the tapping and 
instead check the bottom of the watermelon. ( ② ) Tapping 
a watermelon like a bongo might work for some people, but 
it’s too subjective. ( ③ ) And there’s no agreement on 
whether a watermelon is supposed to sound “solid” or “tight” 
or even make a b­flat sound. ( ④ ) This is where the 
watermelon sat on the ground while it soaked up the sun at 
the farm. ( ⑤ ) If this spot is white or greenish, your 
watermelon may have been picked too soon and might not be 
as ripe as it should be.
40. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
People with low self­esteem often see themselves as 
inadequate or feel like victims.
(A) If that is true of you, then you can combat those 
feelings by serving others. Making a difference ― even a 
small one ― in the lives of other people lifts one’s 
self­esteem.
(B) In addition to that, adding value to others makes them 
value you more. It creates a cycle of positive feeling 
from one person to another.
(C) They focus excessively on themselves. They can become 
self­protective and selfish because they feel that they 
have to be to survive.
① (A) - (C) - (B) ② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A) ④ (C) - (A) - (B)
[41 ∼ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
The economists, Alexander Mas and Enrico Moretti 
could get access to every detail about the productivity of 
a supermarket chain’s cashiers. Using the computerized 
records from the stores’ scanners, they could track 
every “bleep,” every transaction, for 370 cashiers in six 
stores for two years. They could measure each cashier’s 
productivity by the second, and note how it changed 
depending on who else was working at the same time.
Mas and Moretti wanted to find out whether people 
work harder if they are                           . The 
answer is yes: When a quick worker sits next to you, 
you immediately start scanning your items more quickly. 
And you do so because you don’t want to be accused of 
not working hard, rather than because you are inspired 
by their speed. Mas and Moretti know this because they 
observed the way that supermarket checkout aisles are 
arranged: Each worker is looking at a co­worker’s back, 
with his or her own back being watched by a different 
co­worker. Mas and Moretti found that checkout staff do 
not speed up when they are looking at fast colleagues. 
They only speed up when fast colleagues are looking at 
them.
* transaction: 처리, 거래
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① Building Your Own Career
② Lazy Hands Make a Man Poor
③ When Do Workers Work Harder?
④ Who Are Effective Supermarket Managers?
⑤ Importance of Cooperation in the Workplace
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① surrounded by productive colleagues
② offered praise and appreciation
③ allowed to work with a friend
④ provided with higher pay
⑤ given more leisure time
[43 ∼ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
There was a sign in a store window, which said, “Boy 
wanted.” A boy named Crawford Hill walked into the 
store, applied for the job, and was hired. Mr. Peters, the 
store owner, instructed (a) him to go into the attic of 
the building. “You will find a long, deep box up there,” 
he said. “I want you to sort through the contents and 
see what should be saved.”
(B)
If (b) he didn’t report finding the money, how could Mr. 
Peters trust him with the cash register? By finishing the 
job in the hot attic and giving the money to his boss rather 
than pocketing it, Crawford proved that (c) he was both 
faithful and honest. Years later, when Mr. Peters retired, 
he turned his business over to Crawford to manage.
(C)
The boy went into the attic and began sorting 
through the old box of junk. The attic was hot, but 
Crawford spent hours looking through the box, 
separating usable nails and screws from things that 
should be thrown away. When he picked up one of the 
last items in the box, (d) he noticed a twenty­dollar 
bill lying on the bottom. He grabbed the bill, raced 
downstairs, and said, “Look, Mr. Peters! Look what I 
found in the box ― twenty dollars!”
(D)
Then he handed the money to his boss. Mr. Peters 
smiled because he knew that he could trust the boy to 
work in his store. The old junk box was merely a test. 
Mr. Peters had filled it with nails, screws, and other 
items to test his employee’s faithfulness. (e) He wanted 
to see if the boy would complete the job and keep a 
good attitude, even though he didn’t understand why he 
was doing seemingly useless work. Mr. Peters had also 
planted a twenty­dollar bill at the bottom of the box to 
test his employee’s honesty.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B) ④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① Crawford는 상자의 내용물을 분류하라는 지시를 받았다.
② Mr. Peters는 훗날 Crawford에게 사업 관리를 맡겼다.
③ Crawford는 상자 안에서 발견한 돈을 Mr. Peters에게 주었다.
④ Mr. Peters는 Crawford의 정직성을 시험하였다.
⑤ Mr. Peters는 다락방에서 20달러를 잃어버렸다.
※ 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)
했는지 확인하시오.
]