[46~48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
My sister, Tara, was the quiet one in the family. She was 
not as adventurous as my brother and I. She never excelled at 
school or sports. Of course, I loved my sister, but, at times, 
that was not so easy to do. She seldom made eye contact 
with me. When we ran into each other at school, (a) she 
sometimes pretended not to recognize me.
One day, my father’s job forced us to move to a new 
neighborhood. The nurse at our new school, Emerson, gave 
us ear and eye exams, our first ever. I aced the tests― “Eagle 
eyes and elephant ears,” the nurse said― but Tara struggled 
to read the eye chart. (b) She declared Tara severely 
shortsighted and she had to get glasses. When the glasses 
were ready, we all went downtown to pick them up. The first 
time she tried them on, she kept moving her head around and 
up and down. “What’s the matter?” I asked. “You can see that 
tree over there?” she said, pointing at a sycamore tree about a 
hundred feet away. I nodded. (c) She sobbed, “I can see not 
just the branches, but each little leaf.” Tara burst into tears.
On the way home, she kept seeing for the first time all 
these things that most everyone else had stopped noticing. 
She read street signs and billboards aloud. She pointed out 
sparrows sitting on the telephone wires. At home, Tara 
insisted that I try on her glasses. I put them on, and the world 
turned into fuzzy, unfocused shapes. I took a few steps and 
banged my knee on the coffee table. It was at that very 
moment that I truly understood Tara for the first time. I 
realized why (d) she did not like to go exploring, or why she 
did not recognize me at school.
Tara loved seeing the world clearly. Not long after she got 
her glasses, she decided she wanted to be an artist. She 
started compulsively drawing and painting all the wondrous 
things she was discovering. (e) Her first painting of the 
sycamore tree is still her favorite. Today, she is an art teacher 
at Emerson, where she tries to bring the best out of each 
individual student.