40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Centuries ago, philosophers regarded memory as a soft 
wax tablet that would preserve anything imprinted on it. 
With the advent of the printing press, people began to 
think of memory as a library that stores events and 
facts for later retrieval. (Those of us of a certain age 
still think of it that way, muttering about where we 
“filed” information in our mental cabinets.) With the 
inventions of movies and tape recorders, people started 
thinking of memory as a video camera, clicking on at the 
moment of birth and automatically recording every 
moment thereafter. Nowadays we think of memory in 
computer terms, and although some of us wish for more 
RAM, we assume that just about everything that happens 
to us is “saved.” Your brain might not choose to screen 
all those memories, but they are in there, just waiting 
for you to retrieve them.
* wax tablet: 밀랍을 칠한 서자판(書字板)

Memory has been (A)  the objects that reflect our 
times and (B) .
(A) (B)
① enhanced by ······ philosophy
② compared to ······ language
③ cherished by ······ language
④ compared to ······ technology
⑤ enhanced by ······ technology
[41 ∼ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Venture capitalist Ben Horowitz’s “Freaky Friday 
Management Technique” tells an interesting story about 
personnel management. He once led a company where the 
customer support and sales engineering departments 
wouldn’t work together and spoiled each other’s work. He 
was embarrassed because both teams had talented people, 
so he didn’t want to fire anyone, but the company’s 
success depended on their . Then he saw the 
film Freaky Friday, starring Barbara Harris and Jodie 
Foster, where mother and daughter grow completely 
frustrated with each other’s lack of understanding and 
wish that they could switch places and they do. By being 
inside each other’s bodies, both characters develop an 
excellent understanding of the challenges that the other 
faces. As a result, the two women become great friends 
when they switch back. Horowitz decided to apply the 
technique: “The very next day I informed the head of 
Sales Engineering and the head of Customer Support that 
they would be switching jobs.”
Both managers were outraged at first. But Freaky 
Friday worked like magic: “After just one week, both 
executives quickly diagnosed the core issues causing the 
conflict. They then swiftly acted to implement a simple 
set of processes that cleared up the combat and got the 
teams working harmoniously.” From that day forward, 
these two organizations had magnificent .