40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Plants generate hundreds of compounds that they use 
to protect themselves from being overconsumed by 
insects and animals. While some plants use these 
compounds to reduce all foraging, most plants tolerate, or 
even enjoy, about an 18 percent foraging rate (10 to 25 
percent depending on the plant) before they begin to 
initiate high levels of protective compounds. Many of the 
actions of animals when they eat plants (termed 
“herbivory”) are necessary for both plant and ecosystem 
health. Herbivory alters the density, composition, and 
health of plant communities through eating plants, 
dispersing seeds, and defecation. Some plants produce an 
initial series of leaves designed to be eaten, and more 
luxurious growth only occurs once that has happened. For 
many plants, metabolism and respiration are all stimulated 
by animal and insect feeding. It is only after foraging 
rises above a certain level that many plant defensive 
compounds are produced in quantity or come into play.
* foraging: (동물에 의한) 피식(被食)  ** defecation: 배변

Until foraging rate reaches a certain point, many plants 
tend to    (A)    the production of high-level defensive 
compounds for the    (B)    that foraging brings to them.
(A) (B) (A) (B)
① suspend prosperity ② suspend competition
③ extend prosperity ④ extend threat
⑤ stimulate competition
[41 ∼ 43] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Allen Sherman, the comic songwriter best known for 
“Hello Muddah, Hello Faddah” was once in the middle of 
an intense conversation with his wife when his young 
son entered to show off a drawing he had just finished. 
The childish drawing was quickly dismissed by Sherman, 
who was annoyed at having (a) his conversation 
interrupted. The boy, hurt by his father’s rejection of 
the picture, threw it down on the floor, rushed up to his 
room, and slammed the door.
(B)
The embarrassed boy ran up to (b) his room, slammed 
the door, and refused to come down to the party. But a 
little later his mother came up to fetch him. When she 
brought him downstairs, he saw his grandmother proudly 
walking around the room with a large bowl filled with a 
variety of beautiful fruits and, in the middle, the polished 
football he had brought home. When a guest asked his 
grandmother to explain what a football was doing in the 
middle of her fruit bowl, she told (c) him about the gift 
from her grandson and added, “From a child is beautiful, 
anything.”
(C)
Sherman took the football home, polished it till it 
shone, and left it for his grandmother. His mother saw 
the football first, and became upset with him for leaving 
his toys around. When (d) he explained that it was for 
his grandmother’s party, his mother burst into laughter: 
“A football for the party? Don’t you understand your own 
grandma? Not a football, fruit bowl. Grandma needs a 
fruit bowl for the party.”
(D)
The slamming door reminded the now embarrassed 
Sherman of a door that he had slammed twenty-five 
years earlier. One morning he had heard his 
Yiddish-speaking grandmother announce that she needed 
a “football” for a large party she would be hosting that 
evening. Although the young Sherman wondered why his 
grandmother needed a football, he was determined to 
obtain one for her. He went around his neighborhood and 
finally found one boy, a bully who punched (e) him in 
the nose before agreeing to give over his football in 
exchange for Sherman’s best toys.
* Yiddish: 독일어ㆍ히브리어 등의 혼성 언어