39. When something doesn’t meet our expectations, many of us 
operate this assumption, “When in doubt, it must be someone 
else’s fault.” You can see this assumption in action almost 
everywhere you look ― something is missing, so someone else 
must have moved it. This type of blaming thinking has become 
extremely common in our culture. But, in terms of personal 
happiness, you cannot be peaceful while at the same time 
blaming others. Blaming others takes an enormous amount of 
mental energy. It’s a “drag-me-down” mind-set that creates 
stress and disease. Blaming makes you feel powerless over your 
own life because your happiness is contingent on the actions and 
behaviors of others, which you can’t control.   
① 행복을 추구하는 방법은 다양하다. *contingent: 의존하는
37. Mark Plotkin에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? ② 각 문화권마다 행복에 대한 기준이 다르다. ③ 잘못을 지적하는 것은 서로에게 도움이 된다.
Mark Plotkin is an ethnobotanist who became fascinated with ④ 타인을 비난하는 것은 자신의 행복을 방해한다.   
the native culture of Suriname, South America. In the course of ⑤ 자신에 대한 기대를 낮추면 스트레스를 줄일 수 있다.
his fieldwork, Plotkin helped a Suriname shaman, who was also 
his mentor, collect and document hundreds of types of medicinal 40. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
plants. Some elements of these medicinal plants had effects 
similar to those of painkillers found in frogs and anti-tumor Aaron didn’t say anything, but when the next pitch came he 
agents derived from snake venom. Plotkin directed a non-profit hit it into the left-field bleachers. 
group, which set up shamans’ apprentice clinics next to clinics    There is a story involving Yogi Berra, the well-known catcher 
run by missionaries. This gave apprentices the opportunity to for the New York Yankees, and Hank Aaron, who at that time was 
pass on the shamans’ medicine to the world at large. Plotkin’s the chief power hitter for the Milwaukee Braves. ( ① ) The teams 
work earned him praise from the United Nations and the title were playing in the World Series, and as usual Yogi was keeping 
“Hero of the Planet” from Time Magazine.   up his ceaseless chatter. ( ②) He intended to cheer up his 
*venom: 독액 teammates on the one hand and irritate the Milwaukee batters on 
the other. ( ③ ) As Aaron came to the plate, Yogi tried to irritate 
① Suriname의 토착 문화에 매료되었다. him by saying, “Hank, you’re holding the bat wrong. You’re 
② 주술사의 약용 식물 채집을 도왔다. supposed to hold it so you can read the trademark.” ( ④ ) After 
③ 비영리 단체를 이끌었다. rounding the bases and tagging up at home plate, Aaron looked at 
④ 외부 세계로의 약재 유출을 막았다. Yogi Berra and said, “I didn’t come up here to read.” ( ⑤ )
⑤ Hero of the Planet이라는 칭호를 얻었다.      *bleachers: 외야석
6 8
외국어(영어) 영역 7
41. When it comes to buying clothes, shoppers can feel 
overwhelmed by the choices. Now dressing rooms equipped with   About fifty years ago a Pygmy named Kengo took his first trip 
cameras and interactive displays could lead to intelligent fitting out of the dense, tropical forests of Africa and onto the open 
rooms. They connect shoppers to a social fashion network, plains in the company of an anthropologist.
where they could see themselves and others wearing different 
outfits. In the intelligent fitting room, the shopper sees a mirror (A) Rather, because Kengo had lived his entire life in a dense 
flanked by displays. Directly in front, she sees herself in the jungle that offered no view of the horizon, he had failed to 
actual mirror. To the left of the mirror, she sees herself on a learn what most of us take for granted, namely, that things 
display wearing the outfit she tried on previously. To the right look different when they are far away. 
of the mirror, she sees another display showing images of other 
people wearing similar clothes or completely different styles. (B) At that time, buffalo appeared in the distance ― small black 
This allows her to compare multiple outfits at the same time. dots against a white sky ― and Kengo surveyed them 
*flank: 측면에 위치하다 curiously. Finally, he turned to the anthropologist and asked 
① Shopping for Clothes of Various Sizes what kind of insects they were. 
② Buying Cheap Clothes through the Internet
③ New Trends in Designing Women’s Clothes (C) When he told Kengo that the insects were buffalo, Kengo 
④ Installing Security Cameras in Clothes Shops roared with laughter and told the anthropologist not to tell 
⑤ Smart Fitting Room Suggesting What to Wear such stupid lies. But the anthropologist wasn’t stupid and he hadn’t lied. 
42. There has probably been a time when you’ve gone into ① (A)-(C)-(B) ② (B)-(A)-(C) ③ (B)-(C)-(A)
someone’s study or workroom and thought, “This place works! ④ (C)-(A)-(B) ⑤ (C)-(B)-(A) 
No wonder she’s so productive. Anyone would be up for learning 
and creativity in this environment.” The right learning place can 
do the same thing for you. It can be anything from an elaborate 
office in your house to a room in your apartment or a corner of 45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 
your bedroom. However modest at the start, a comfortable 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
learning place is an important step in taking command of your 
own growth. When asked, “What does a woman need in order to  Individuals and groups are engaged in the work of forming and 
be able to write?” Virginia Woolf responded with a phrase that refining their identities throughout their life spans. But it is in 
became the title of one of her books: “A room of one’s own.” adolescence that the largest part of this work is accomplished. 
① Convenience of Office Supplies And look at the pride or narcissism that is involved. It is normal 
② Advantages of Office Automation for adolescents to be extremely preoccupied with how they look. 
③ Benefits of Having Your Own Space Even though their clothes may appear either careless and slovenly 
④ Roles of Tests in Learning Processes or otherwise outrageous to their parents, to adolescents they are 
⑤ Effects of Creativity on Your Learning extremely important. When they try them on, they are trying on various identities. They spend endless hours looking at 
themselves in the mirror, good or bad. As they look in those 
43. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은? mirrors, they are in a very real way trying to figure out who they 
The rush and pace of business grew fiercer and faster. On the floor are, seeking to discern  an identity in those reflections.
they were pounding half a dozen stocks in which Peter’s customers 
were heavy investors. Orders to buy and sell were coming and going                                               󰀻
as swift as the flight of swallows. Some of his own holdings were 
imperilled. With the proper decision and act ready and prompt as   During adolescence, the interest in        (A)         is a natural 
clockwork, Peter was working like some high-geared, delicate, part of the process of forming a(n)          (B)        .
strong machine―strung to full tension, going at full speed, 
accurate, never hesitating. Stocks and bonds, loans and mortgages,      (A)     (B)
margins and securities ― here was a world of finance. ① appearances …… identity② appearances …… sociality
① busy and tense ② calm and peaceful ③ family …… personality
③ festive and merry ④ romantic and pastoral ④ grades …… habit
⑤ mysterious and prophetic                                       ⑤ grades …… confidence
7 8
8 외국어(영어) 영역
[ 46-48 ] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오. [49-50] 두 사람의 대립된 의견을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A) One day a math teacher asked her students to list the names 
of the other students in the room on a sheet of paper. Then she Person A Concern over the environmental impact of burning 
told them to write down (a) the nicest thing they could say about fossil fuels has helped spur interest in an alternative fuel. As for 
each of their classmates. As the students left the room, each one this issue, I strongly believe that we should choose biomass as an 
handed in the papers. That Saturday, the teacher wrote down the alternative fuel. Biomass is plant-derived material usable as a 
name of each student on a separate sheet of paper, and listed renewable energy source which does not deplete existing 
what everyone else had said about that individual. supplies. It contains almost no sulfur, little ash, and gives off few pollutants, so it is very clean. Another good point is that it is 
(B) Years later, Joe, one of her students, died in Vietnam and readily available and in large supply because plants are probably 
she attended the funeral. After the funeral his father came to one of the richest resources in the world. Most of all, biomass 
speak with her. “We want to show you something,” said his father. technology is simple, so biomass can be burned as easily as coal 
Opening his billfold, he carefully removed a worn piece of paper. and liquefied even more easily than coal. I believe one day it will 
On the paper was (b) all the remarks Joe’s classmates had made replace fossil fuels.
about him. “Thank you for your thoughtfulness,” Joe’s father said.
Person B Some people argue that we should use biomass as 
(C) All of Joe’s former classmates started to gather around her. alternative energy. They insist that biomass fuels are clean, 
Chuck said, “I put mine in my wedding album.” Charlie smiled and readily available, and easily converted into gas or liquid form. 
said, “I have cherished (c) the treasure I got from my classmates. However, I think they ignore the fact that biomass has low 
I think we all saved our lists.” The teacher said to them, “The efficiency, resulting in high production costs. One-third to 
density of people in society is so thick that we forget that life will two-thirds of energy is lost in most biomass conversion. The 
end one day. So, before it is too late, please tell the people who low conversion rates of biomass lead to burning more plants, 
you love that                                                              .” generating much more carbon dioxide and pollution gases. I am convinced that this fact is strongly against the idea that biomass 
(D) On Monday, she gave each student a sheet of paper with is clean energy. The low efficiency also requires substantial 
(d) comments from other students. Before long, the entire amounts of land, which will increase the possibility that biomass 
class was smiling. “I never knew that I meant anything to fuel crops will eventually                                                  . 
anyone!” and “I didn’t know others liked me so much,” were  
(e) most of the responses. She never knew if they discussed 
their own lists after class or with their parents, but it didn’t 49. 위 두 글의 핵심 쟁점으로 가장 적절한 것은?
matter. The exercise had accomplished its purpose. That ① efficient land use ② using biomass energy
group of students moved on. ③ raising cost of fossil fuels ④ recycling of biomass wastes
⑤ necessity of substantial land
46. 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B)-(D)-(C) ② (C)-(B)-(D) ③ (C)-(D)-(B) 
④ (D)-(B)-(C) ⑤ (D)-(C)-(B) 
50. Person B의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① lower the cost of food crops 
47. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 의미하는 바가 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? ② be suitable for food production
③ decrease environmental damage
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e) ④ compete for land with food crops
⑤ remove harmful insects from land
48. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① they are special and important 
② they can afford to help the poor  ※ 확인사항
③ higher education will do you good  ○ 문제지와 답안지의 해당란을 정확히 기입(표기)했
④ they should listen to their inner voices
⑤ health is the most important thing in life 는지 확인하시오. 
8 8
]