4. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 음식 주문 취소하기 ② 보안 상태 확인하기 Model Price Gear shift Mileage Color
③ 전화 요금 알아보기 ④ 일간 신문 챙겨주기 ① Ace 1.0 $4,900 Automatic 13,985 miles White
⑤ 여행 정보 수집하기 ② Ace 1.0 $3,700 Manual 28,469 miles Black
③ Ace 0.8 $4,600 Automatic 18,368 miles Black
대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. ④ Ace 0.8 $3,100 Manual 32,432 miles White5. ⑤ Ace 0.8 $2,800 Automatic 49,531 miles Brown
① $1,200 ② $1,250 ③ $1,300 ④ $1,350 ⑤ $1,500
1 8
2 외국어(영어) 영역
1 2. 버스 관광에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. 17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Sharon 선생님이 James에게 할 말로 가장  ① 승차권은 20달러이다. 적절한 것을 고르시오.
② 2시간이 소요된다.
③ 불꽃놀이 구경이 포함된다.     Sharon:                                                                         
④ 10분간의 휴식시간이 주어진다. ① You’re an excellent photographer.
⑤ 사진촬영을 원하면 차를 세워준다. ② You are very skilled in writing drama.③ It’s a good job. But could you make it shorter? 
다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.  [1점] ④ Congratulations! What will you do after graduation?13. ⑤ Why don’t you keep your wonderful memories forever?
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 밑줄 친 They(they)가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
Instruments in the percussion family are played by being 
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 struck, shaken, or scraped. Among percussion instruments, they 
적절한 것을 고르시오. are made from two large, slightly concave metal plates. They are fitted with leather hand straps and are shaped so that when they 
Woman: Right.                                                               are crashed together, only the edges touch. When they are 
① Let’s take a walk to the office. scraped against one another, they produce a pleasing metallic 
② I will call every floor using the interphone. sound. Although they are untuned instruments, they produce a 
③ It will be better to make an interphone call to the office. wide range of sound effects. Some of them are so small that they 
④ Visit every floor to ask them not to smoke in the elevator. can be played with just the fingers. They are also played with 
⑤ Taking the elevator is the easiest way to get to the office. sticks while suspended on a string or a stand. *percussion: 타악기
15. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 ① cymbals ② handbells ③ chimes
적절한 것을 고르시오. ④ tambourines ⑤ castanets    
Man:                                                                            
① It depends on how fast she recovers.
② She wants you to see her in the hospital.
③ The operation turned out to be successful.
④ Her best friend will come to see her next week. 19. 밑줄 친 She(she)가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? 
⑤ I wish I could just sit up and watch whatever I want.   Deep inside an ancient pyramid in Peru, a female archaeologist 
noticed　rectangular patches of soft clay ― a telltale sign of a 
16. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 grave. ① She was examining a sacred location. After weeks of 
적절한 것을 고르시오. careful digging, ② she looked through the ancient dust. A 
Woman:                                                                        mummy lay in front of her. As ③ she unwrapped the bundled layers, hundreds of treasures were revealed, including gold, 
① The flea market is too far away. sparkling crowns, and huge war clubs usually reserved for the 
② Absolutely. This jacket proves it. greatest warriors. But when ④ she lifted a gold bowl covering 
③ I am going to quit online shopping. the mummy’s face, the archaeologist found the biggest surprise 
④ The address is difficult to remember. yet. The mummy wasn’t a king or a male warrior; it was a young 
⑤ You know, flea markets are growing up offline. woman. ⑤ She was covered in mysterious tattoos! 
2 8
외국어(영어) 영역 3
20. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점] 23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
I am the chairman of Troop 597’s October Charity Drive. The   These days, e-mail is thought to be one of the most effective 
proceeds of our activities will benefit the Willimet Community ways to communicate. However, it can be a highly flawed 
Center on Dodd Street. To raise money, we are holding a communication vehicle in a workplace setting. ① Some people 
recycling drive. As you know, state law requires a 5-cent use it inappropriately to avoid confrontation or to pass secrets 
deposit on all aluminum cans sold. When a can is emptied, it may among their friends. ② Some employees can say things in 
be redeemed at the recycling center for the nickel deposit. Help e-mail that they would never say to someone’s face. ③ To make 
us to help the environment and our Community Center at the matters worse, e-mail is likely to be misunderstood. ④ E-mail 
same time. Troop 597 will set up a collection stall in the is a system for transmitting messages and computer files 
Community Center parking lot from October 1st to 31st. Please electronically. ⑤ Because e-mail lacks the tone, inflection, and 
stop by to drop off any empty cans you would like to donate. body language of the communicator, a message may be 
① 정부에 재활용 캔의 단가 인상을 촉구하려고 interpreted wrongly by the receiver.
② 공원 내 쓰레기 분리수거 운동을 홍보하려고 *inflection: 억양 
③ 재활용시설의 기공식 행사 참석을 요청하려고
④ 환경 단체의 운영을 위한 기부금 납부를 부탁하려고
⑤ 자선기금 마련을 위한 빈 캔 수거 동참을 권유하려고  
[24-27] 다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
21. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은? 24. I see that my husband was simply engaging the world in a 
Note taking is one of the activities by which students attempt to way that many men do: as an individual in a hierarchical social 
stay attentive, but it is also an aid to memory. “Working order in which he was either one-up or one-down. In this 
memory,” or “short-term memory” is a term (A) used / using  to world, conversations are negotiations in which people try to 
describe the fact that one can hold only a given amount of achieve and maintain the upper hand. Life, then, is a contest, a 
material in mind at one time. When a lecturer presents a struggle to preserve independence and avoid failure. I, on the 
succession of new concepts, students’ faces begin to show signs other hand, was approaching the world as an individual in a 
of anguish and frustration; some write furiously in their network of connections. In this world, conversations are 
notebooks, while (B) other / others give up writing in complete negotiations for closeness in which people try to seek and give 
discouragement. Note taking thus is dependent on one’s ability to confirmation and support, and to reach consensus. Life, then, is a 
maintain attention, understand what is being said, and hold it in community, a struggle to preserve intimacy and avoid isolation. 
working memory long enough to (C) write down it / write it down . Though there are hierarchies in this world too, they are hierarchies more of                            than of power and 
①  u(sAed) ……   o(tBh)er ……   w  r i t e ( Cdo)wn it accomplishment.
② used …… others …… write it down
③ used …… others …… write down it ① wealth ② friendship ③ secrecy
④ using …… others …… write it down ④ conflict ⑤ competition 
⑤ using …… other …… write down it
22. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? 25. Today’s heroes often ride in rockets instead of on winged horses, and their weapons are more likely to be fashioned by 
Is quicksand for real? Yes, but it’s not as deadly as it is in the technology experts rather than by cave-dwelling dwarfs. However, 
movies. Quicksand forms when sand gets mixed with too much heroes of everytime and culture must                                  along 
water and ① becomes loosened and soupy. It may look like the way if they journey forth to do what heroes must do. Myth 
normal sand, but if you were to step on it, the pressure from and folk tale heroes are called upon to take up a quest, or 
your foot would cause the sand ② to act more like a liquid, and journey, just as each human being must journey through life. The 
you’d sink right in. Pressure from underground sources of water journey is a test of courage, will and character and the 
would separate and suspend the granular particles, ③ reduced challenges come in the form of monsters and evil gods, or 
the friction between them. In quicksand, the more you struggle, temptations and inner struggles. 
the ④ deeper you’ll sink. But if you remain still, you’ll start to 
float. So if you ever do fall into quicksand, remember to stay ① keep secrets ② face perils ③ take prisoners
calm, and don’t move until you’ve stopped ⑤ sinking. ④ know the rules ⑤ have wild dreams
3 8
4 외국어(영어) 영역
2 6. Our survival in the everyday world requires us to perform   (A) (B)  (C)thousands of small tests without failure. Nevertheless, too great ① maximize …… higher …… distract
an adherence to the belief “to err is wrong” can greatly ② maximize …… lower …… distract
undermine your attempts to generate new ideas. If you’re ③ maximize …… higher …… attract
concerned with producing right answers rather than generating ④ analyze …… higher …… distract
original ideas, you’ll bypass the germinal phase of the creative ⑤ analyze …… lower …… attract
process. Thus, you’ll spend little time testing assumptions, 
challenging the rules, asking what-if questions, or just playing 
around with the problem. All of these techniques will produce 29. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
some incorrect answers, but in the germinal phase errors are 않은 것은? 
viewed as a(n)                                                          .  [3점]
*germinal: 초기의
① way to prevent your predictions
② uncritical adherence to the original ideas 
③ misleading part of getting correct answers
④ necessary by-product of creative thinking
⑤ useless procedure in scientific experiments
27. The best way to read fiction is to mix one’s reading, neither 
to favor the present at the expense of the past nor to favor the    
past at the expense of the present. And do not think  
contemporary work will appear thin and trivial compared with 
the great work of the past. It is not necessarily so at all. As a   The Eiffel Tower is a metal structure. There are many steps 
professional reader, I have to try to keep side by side with that can be climbed in order to reach the ① two viewing 
contemporary fiction while constantly widening and deepening platforms. There are plans to build ② below the foundations of 
my knowledge of the fiction of earlier times. I’m continually the tower. These plans include the development of five 
turning from the most vital work of our time to the classic underground levels that will ③ incorporate the tower’s ticket 
novels, and I find no opposition between them. That is,         o f  f ic  e, shopping facilities, a cinema and two floors of parking. 
. Although details have yet to be finalized, the principle is that the five floors will be connected by two ④ horizontal passenger lifts. 
① classic novels are hard to get In addition, the floor immediately below the tower will have a 
② they are not mutually exclusive glass ceiling so that visitors can look directly ⑤ up at the tower 
③ we’d better choose one of them itself.
④ contemporary works are favored
⑤ knowledge can be found in classic
30. 다음 글의 마지막에 드러난  소년의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
A young boy named Steve went to a police department auction of 
28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?  bicycles. Each time the auctioneer started the bidding, the boy 
Finding good prices for travel is so complicated. That is because would say, “I bid one dollar, sir.” The bidding would continue 
airlines have complex formulas for inventory management so they higher and higher until each bicycle was sold to the highest bidder. 
can (A) maximize / analyze  profits by filling planes. When there As the last bicycle to be sold was brought forth, the little boy  
are lots of reservations during peak seasons, these companies cried again, “I bid one dollar, sir.” The figures in the bidding rose 
can charge (B) lower / higher prices and still be sure that higher and the auctioneer finally closed the bidding at $9 to Steve. 
somebody will need their services no matter how much it To Steve’s surprise, the auctioneer pulled $8 out and laid it on the 
costs. On the other hand, during the off season, demand is counter. Steve put his one dollar alongside it, ran to the auctioneer, 
low, so companies cut their prices to (C) attract / distract  threw his arms around the auctioneer’s neck, and cried.
people who would normally not travel at that time. One good ① sad and regretful ② relieved and grateful
place in which to find these last-minute bargains is on the ③ proud and confident ④ envious and irritated
Internet. ⑤ worried and dissatisfied 
4 8
외국어(영어) 영역 5
31. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 33. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Assertive behavior involves standing up for your rights and   True freedom is found in doing the things that scare us the 
expressing your thoughts and feelings in a direct, appropriate way most. Take a leap and you will find life, not lose it. Don’t make 
that does not violate the rights of others. People who exhibit fear a permanent part of your life: letting it go, or at least living 
assertive behavior are able to handle conflict situations with ease in spite of fear, surprisingly and paradoxically, takes you to a 
and assurance while maintaining good interpersonal relations.       place of safety. You can learn to love without hesitation, to 
(A)      , aggressive behavior involves expressing your speak without caution, and to care without self-defensiveness. 
thoughts and feelings and defending your rights in a way that Once we are on the other side of our fears, we find new life. As 
openly violates the rights of others. Those exhibiting aggressive Helen Keller said, “Life is either a daring adventure or it’s 
behavior seem to believe that the rights of others must be nothing.” If we can learn this lesson, we can lead a life of awe 
subservient to theirs.        (B)       , they have a difficult time and wonder.
maintaining good interpersonal relations. They are likely to 
interrupt, talk fast and ignore others to maintain control.  ① 봉사와 희생정신을 길러라.  
*subservient: 종속하는, 복종하는 ② 두려움을 극복하고 도전하라.
(A)    (B) ③ 확고한 목표를 가지고 살아라.
① In contrast …… Thus ④ 배움으로 멋진 인생을 영위하라.
② Accordingly …… However ⑤ 양보하고 배려하는 자세를 지녀라.
③ As a result …… However     
④ In contrast …… Instead
⑤ As a result …… Thus [34-35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. Leftovers may be the best thing about holiday diners. For most 
Americans, eating them from a holiday meal is as traditional as the meal itself. But treat these leftovers with care, or you could 
get sick. If you decide to reinvent your holiday meal, take these 
steps to help ensure it’s as safe as it is delicious. The worst 
mistake is keeping food out too long. When storing, you want 
leftovers to quickly cool to 40°F or below. Shallow airtight 
32. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 문장은? containers are better than foil or plastic bags. Chop meats to get the temperature down faster. Pack perishable lunch foods in a 
sealed bag and throw it in an ice pack to make sure foods stay 
properly chilled. 
① how to enjoy holiday nights
② tips for treating holiday leftovers
③ preparing for traditional holiday meals 
④ inventing new recipes for holiday dinners
⑤ worst things that can happen at holiday dinners
35. Most of our misconceptions about art arise from the confusion 
we might have in the use of the words “art” and “beauty.” We 
The above chart shows pupils achieving GCSE grades A*-C in always assume that all that is beautiful is art, or that all art is 
2003/4 in the UK. ① A higher proportion of females than males beautiful, that what is not beautiful is not art, and that ugliness 
achieved GCSE grades A*-C. ② Northern Ireland had the highest is the negation of art. This identification of art and beauty is at 
percentage of females who achieved GCSE grades A*-C. ③ In the bottom of all our difficulties in the appreciation of art. And 
the cases of London and England, the proportion of males who even in highly aesthetic people, this assumption acts like an 
achieved GCSE grades A*-C was almost the same. ④ The gap unconscious censor in particular cases when art is not beauty. So 
between females and males who achieved GCSE grades A*-C we must remember that art is not necessarily beauty: that 
was the greatest in Northern Ireland, and the smallest in Wales. cannot be said too often.
⑤ Scotland was the region with the highest proportion of males ① 예술 감상의 교육적 의의 ② 아름다움과 추함의 구분
who achieved GCSE grades A*-C. ③ 예술에 대한 잘못된 개념 ④ 아름다움의 현대적 기준 
*GCSE: 중등 교육 일반 증서 ⑤ 예술의 다양한 표현 기법
5 8
6 외국어(영어) 영역
3 6. Street luge에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은? [38-39] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Street luge was born in Southern California when downhill 38. Years ago, I went into a government building that had two sets 
skateboarders found they could reach higher speeds by lying down of double doors spaced about fifteen feet apart. For security 
on their skateboards. Street luge is an extreme, gravity-powered reasons, when I went through the first set of doors, I had to let 
sport that involves riding a streetluge board without mechanical them close tightly before the next set of doors would open in 
brakes down a paved road or course while lying flat on one’s back. front of me. As long as I stayed at the first set of doors, the 
Race courses are found on mountain roads and city streets. Riders second set would not open. In many ways, life operates in a 
are required to wear safety equipment including a hard shell manner similar to those automatic doors. Step forward into the 
helmet with chin strap, face shield, goggles, racing suit, gloves, future, knowing there’s nothing you can do about past 
and sturdy shoes. Courses can range in length from 1 to 5 km and disappointments. Where you are going is more significant than 
the race winner is based on top speed. where you came from or where you have been. If you have the right attitude, you will give birth to more in the future than 
① 보드 위에 서서 속도를 즐긴다. you’ve lost in the past. 
② 모터를 동력원으로 사용한다. ① 결과보다는 과정이 중요하다.
③ 기계식 브레이크가 달린 보드를 이용한다. ② 과거는 미래를 비추는 거울이다.
④ 보호 장비 없이도 안전하게 탈 수 있다. ③ 끊임없이 삶을 돌아보고 반성하라.
⑤ 최고 속도를 낸 사람이 우승자가 된다.  ④ 미래의 결과를 성급히 판단하지 말라.
⑤ 과거에 얽매이지 말고 미래를 중시해라. 
39. When something doesn’t meet our expectations, many of us 
operate this assumption, “When in doubt, it must be someone 
else’s fault.” You can see this assumption in action almost 
everywhere you look ― something is missing, so someone else 
must have moved it. This type of blaming thinking has become 
extremely common in our culture. But, in terms of personal 
happiness, you cannot be peaceful while at the same time 
blaming others. Blaming others takes an enormous amount of 
mental energy. It’s a “drag-me-down” mind-set that creates 
stress and disease. Blaming makes you feel powerless over your 
own life because your happiness is contingent on the actions and 
behaviors of others, which you can’t control.   
① 행복을 추구하는 방법은 다양하다. *contingent: 의존하는
37. Mark Plotkin에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? ② 각 문화권마다 행복에 대한 기준이 다르다. ③ 잘못을 지적하는 것은 서로에게 도움이 된다.
Mark Plotkin is an ethnobotanist who became fascinated with ④ 타인을 비난하는 것은 자신의 행복을 방해한다.   
the native culture of Suriname, South America. In the course of ⑤ 자신에 대한 기대를 낮추면 스트레스를 줄일 수 있다.
his fieldwork, Plotkin helped a Suriname shaman, who was also 
his mentor, collect and document hundreds of types of medicinal 40. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
plants. Some elements of these medicinal plants had effects 
similar to those of painkillers found in frogs and anti-tumor Aaron didn’t say anything, but when the next pitch came he 
agents derived from snake venom. Plotkin directed a non-profit hit it into the left-field bleachers. 
group, which set up shamans’ apprentice clinics next to clinics    There is a story involving Yogi Berra, the well-known catcher 
run by missionaries. This gave apprentices the opportunity to for the New York Yankees, and Hank Aaron, who at that time was 
pass on the shamans’ medicine to the world at large. Plotkin’s the chief power hitter for the Milwaukee Braves. ( ① ) The teams 
work earned him praise from the United Nations and the title were playing in the World Series, and as usual Yogi was keeping 
“Hero of the Planet” from Time Magazine.   up his ceaseless chatter. ( ②) He intended to cheer up his 
*venom: 독액 teammates on the one hand and irritate the Milwaukee batters on 
the other. ( ③ ) As Aaron came to the plate, Yogi tried to irritate 
① Suriname의 토착 문화에 매료되었다. him by saying, “Hank, you’re holding the bat wrong. You’re 
② 주술사의 약용 식물 채집을 도왔다. supposed to hold it so you can read the trademark.” ( ④ ) After 
③ 비영리 단체를 이끌었다. rounding the bases and tagging up at home plate, Aaron looked at 
④ 외부 세계로의 약재 유출을 막았다. Yogi Berra and said, “I didn’t come up here to read.” ( ⑤ )
⑤ Hero of the Planet이라는 칭호를 얻었다.      *bleachers: 외야석
6 8
외국어(영어) 영역 7
41. When it comes to buying clothes, shoppers can feel 
overwhelmed by the choices. Now dressing rooms equipped with   About fifty years ago a Pygmy named Kengo took his first trip 
cameras and interactive displays could lead to intelligent fitting out of the dense, tropical forests of Africa and onto the open 
rooms. They connect shoppers to a social fashion network, plains in the company of an anthropologist.
where they could see themselves and others wearing different 
outfits. In the intelligent fitting room, the shopper sees a mirror (A) Rather, because Kengo had lived his entire life in a dense 
flanked by displays. Directly in front, she sees herself in the jungle that offered no view of the horizon, he had failed to 
actual mirror. To the left of the mirror, she sees herself on a learn what most of us take for granted, namely, that things 
display wearing the outfit she tried on previously. To the right look different when they are far away. 
of the mirror, she sees another display showing images of other 
people wearing similar clothes or completely different styles. (B) At that time, buffalo appeared in the distance ― small black 
This allows her to compare multiple outfits at the same time. dots against a white sky ― and Kengo surveyed them 
*flank: 측면에 위치하다 curiously. Finally, he turned to the anthropologist and asked 
① Shopping for Clothes of Various Sizes what kind of insects they were. 
② Buying Cheap Clothes through the Internet
③ New Trends in Designing Women’s Clothes (C) When he told Kengo that the insects were buffalo, Kengo 
④ Installing Security Cameras in Clothes Shops roared with laughter and told the anthropologist not to tell 
⑤ Smart Fitting Room Suggesting What to Wear such stupid lies. But the anthropologist wasn’t stupid and he hadn’t lied. 
42. There has probably been a time when you’ve gone into ① (A)-(C)-(B) ② (B)-(A)-(C) ③ (B)-(C)-(A)
someone’s study or workroom and thought, “This place works! ④ (C)-(A)-(B) ⑤ (C)-(B)-(A) 
No wonder she’s so productive. Anyone would be up for learning 
and creativity in this environment.” The right learning place can 
do the same thing for you. It can be anything from an elaborate 
office in your house to a room in your apartment or a corner of 45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 
your bedroom. However modest at the start, a comfortable 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
learning place is an important step in taking command of your 
own growth. When asked, “What does a woman need in order to  Individuals and groups are engaged in the work of forming and 
be able to write?” Virginia Woolf responded with a phrase that refining their identities throughout their life spans. But it is in 
became the title of one of her books: “A room of one’s own.” adolescence that the largest part of this work is accomplished. 
① Convenience of Office Supplies And look at the pride or narcissism that is involved. It is normal 
② Advantages of Office Automation for adolescents to be extremely preoccupied with how they look. 
③ Benefits of Having Your Own Space Even though their clothes may appear either careless and slovenly 
④ Roles of Tests in Learning Processes or otherwise outrageous to their parents, to adolescents they are 
⑤ Effects of Creativity on Your Learning extremely important. When they try them on, they are trying on various identities. They spend endless hours looking at 
themselves in the mirror, good or bad. As they look in those 
43. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은? mirrors, they are in a very real way trying to figure out who they 
The rush and pace of business grew fiercer and faster. On the floor are, seeking to discern  an identity in those reflections.
they were pounding half a dozen stocks in which Peter’s customers 
were heavy investors. Orders to buy and sell were coming and going                                               󰀻
as swift as the flight of swallows. Some of his own holdings were 
imperilled. With the proper decision and act ready and prompt as   During adolescence, the interest in        (A)         is a natural 
clockwork, Peter was working like some high-geared, delicate, part of the process of forming a(n)          (B)        .
strong machine―strung to full tension, going at full speed, 
accurate, never hesitating. Stocks and bonds, loans and mortgages,      (A)     (B)
margins and securities ― here was a world of finance. ① appearances …… identity② appearances …… sociality
① busy and tense ② calm and peaceful ③ family …… personality
③ festive and merry ④ romantic and pastoral ④ grades …… habit
⑤ mysterious and prophetic                                       ⑤ grades …… confidence
7 8
8 외국어(영어) 영역
[ 46-48 ] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오. [49-50] 두 사람의 대립된 의견을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A) One day a math teacher asked her students to list the names 
of the other students in the room on a sheet of paper. Then she Person A Concern over the environmental impact of burning 
told them to write down (a) the nicest thing they could say about fossil fuels has helped spur interest in an alternative fuel. As for 
each of their classmates. As the students left the room, each one this issue, I strongly believe that we should choose biomass as an 
handed in the papers. That Saturday, the teacher wrote down the alternative fuel. Biomass is plant-derived material usable as a 
name of each student on a separate sheet of paper, and listed renewable energy source which does not deplete existing 
what everyone else had said about that individual. supplies. It contains almost no sulfur, little ash, and gives off few pollutants, so it is very clean. Another good point is that it is 
(B) Years later, Joe, one of her students, died in Vietnam and readily available and in large supply because plants are probably 
she attended the funeral. After the funeral his father came to one of the richest resources in the world. Most of all, biomass 
speak with her. “We want to show you something,” said his father. technology is simple, so biomass can be burned as easily as coal 
Opening his billfold, he carefully removed a worn piece of paper. and liquefied even more easily than coal. I believe one day it will 
On the paper was (b) all the remarks Joe’s classmates had made replace fossil fuels.
about him. “Thank you for your thoughtfulness,” Joe’s father said.
Person B Some people argue that we should use biomass as 
(C) All of Joe’s former classmates started to gather around her. alternative energy. They insist that biomass fuels are clean, 
Chuck said, “I put mine in my wedding album.” Charlie smiled and readily available, and easily converted into gas or liquid form. 
said, “I have cherished (c) the treasure I got from my classmates. However, I think they ignore the fact that biomass has low 
I think we all saved our lists.” The teacher said to them, “The efficiency, resulting in high production costs. One-third to 
density of people in society is so thick that we forget that life will two-thirds of energy is lost in most biomass conversion. The 
end one day. So, before it is too late, please tell the people who low conversion rates of biomass lead to burning more plants, 
you love that                                                              .” generating much more carbon dioxide and pollution gases. I am convinced that this fact is strongly against the idea that biomass 
(D) On Monday, she gave each student a sheet of paper with is clean energy. The low efficiency also requires substantial 
(d) comments from other students. Before long, the entire amounts of land, which will increase the possibility that biomass 
class was smiling. “I never knew that I meant anything to fuel crops will eventually                                                  . 
anyone!” and “I didn’t know others liked me so much,” were  
(e) most of the responses. She never knew if they discussed 
their own lists after class or with their parents, but it didn’t 49. 위 두 글의 핵심 쟁점으로 가장 적절한 것은?
matter. The exercise had accomplished its purpose. That ① efficient land use ② using biomass energy
group of students moved on. ③ raising cost of fossil fuels ④ recycling of biomass wastes
⑤ necessity of substantial land
46. 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B)-(D)-(C) ② (C)-(B)-(D) ③ (C)-(D)-(B) 
④ (D)-(B)-(C) ⑤ (D)-(C)-(B) 
50. Person B의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① lower the cost of food crops 
47. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 의미하는 바가 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? ② be suitable for food production
③ decrease environmental damage
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e) ④ compete for land with food crops
⑤ remove harmful insects from land
48. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① they are special and important 
② they can afford to help the poor  ※ 확인사항
③ higher education will do you good  ○ 문제지와 답안지의 해당란을 정확히 기입(표기)했
④ they should listen to their inner voices
⑤ health is the most important thing in life 는지 확인하시오. 
8 8
]