43. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은? mirrors, they are in a very real way trying to figure out who they 
The rush and pace of business grew fiercer and faster. On the floor are, seeking to discern  an identity in those reflections.
they were pounding half a dozen stocks in which Peter’s customers 
were heavy investors. Orders to buy and sell were coming and going                                               󰀻
as swift as the flight of swallows. Some of his own holdings were 
imperilled. With the proper decision and act ready and prompt as   During adolescence, the interest in        (A)         is a natural 
clockwork, Peter was working like some high-geared, delicate, part of the process of forming a(n)          (B)        .
strong machine―strung to full tension, going at full speed, 
accurate, never hesitating. Stocks and bonds, loans and mortgages,      (A)     (B)
margins and securities ― here was a world of finance. ① appearances …… identity② appearances …… sociality
① busy and tense ② calm and peaceful ③ family …… personality
③ festive and merry ④ romantic and pastoral ④ grades …… habit
⑤ mysterious and prophetic                                       ⑤ grades …… confidence
7 8
8 외국어(영어) 영역
[ 46-48 ] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오. [49-50] 두 사람의 대립된 의견을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A) One day a math teacher asked her students to list the names 
of the other students in the room on a sheet of paper. Then she Person A Concern over the environmental impact of burning 
told them to write down (a) the nicest thing they could say about fossil fuels has helped spur interest in an alternative fuel. As for 
each of their classmates. As the students left the room, each one this issue, I strongly believe that we should choose biomass as an 
handed in the papers. That Saturday, the teacher wrote down the alternative fuel. Biomass is plant-derived material usable as a 
name of each student on a separate sheet of paper, and listed renewable energy source which does not deplete existing 
what everyone else had said about that individual. supplies. It contains almost no sulfur, little ash, and gives off few pollutants, so it is very clean. Another good point is that it is 
(B) Years later, Joe, one of her students, died in Vietnam and readily available and in large supply because plants are probably 
she attended the funeral. After the funeral his father came to one of the richest resources in the world. Most of all, biomass 
speak with her. “We want to show you something,” said his father. technology is simple, so biomass can be burned as easily as coal 
Opening his billfold, he carefully removed a worn piece of paper. and liquefied even more easily than coal. I believe one day it will 
On the paper was (b) all the remarks Joe’s classmates had made replace fossil fuels.
about him. “Thank you for your thoughtfulness,” Joe’s father said.
Person B Some people argue that we should use biomass as 
(C) All of Joe’s former classmates started to gather around her. alternative energy. They insist that biomass fuels are clean, 
Chuck said, “I put mine in my wedding album.” Charlie smiled and readily available, and easily converted into gas or liquid form. 
said, “I have cherished (c) the treasure I got from my classmates. However, I think they ignore the fact that biomass has low 
I think we all saved our lists.” The teacher said to them, “The efficiency, resulting in high production costs. One-third to 
density of people in society is so thick that we forget that life will two-thirds of energy is lost in most biomass conversion. The 
end one day. So, before it is too late, please tell the people who low conversion rates of biomass lead to burning more plants, 
you love that                                                              .” generating much more carbon dioxide and pollution gases. I am convinced that this fact is strongly against the idea that biomass 
(D) On Monday, she gave each student a sheet of paper with is clean energy. The low efficiency also requires substantial 
(d) comments from other students. Before long, the entire amounts of land, which will increase the possibility that biomass 
class was smiling. “I never knew that I meant anything to fuel crops will eventually                                                  . 
anyone!” and “I didn’t know others liked me so much,” were  
(e) most of the responses. She never knew if they discussed 
their own lists after class or with their parents, but it didn’t 49. 위 두 글의 핵심 쟁점으로 가장 적절한 것은?
matter. The exercise had accomplished its purpose. That ① efficient land use ② using biomass energy
group of students moved on. ③ raising cost of fossil fuels ④ recycling of biomass wastes
⑤ necessity of substantial land
46. 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B)-(D)-(C) ② (C)-(B)-(D) ③ (C)-(D)-(B) 
④ (D)-(B)-(C) ⑤ (D)-(C)-(B) 
50. Person B의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① lower the cost of food crops 
47. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 의미하는 바가 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? ② be suitable for food production
③ decrease environmental damage
① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e) ④ compete for land with food crops
⑤ remove harmful insects from land
48. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① they are special and important 
② they can afford to help the poor  ※ 확인사항
③ higher education will do you good  ○ 문제지와 답안지의 해당란을 정확히 기입(표기)했
④ they should listen to their inner voices
⑤ health is the most important thing in life 는지 확인하시오. 
8 8
]